AdapMoE: Adaptive Sensitivity-based Expert Gating
and Management for Efficient MoE Inference
Shuzhang Zhong1,2 , Ling Liang2 , Yuan Wang2,4 , Runsheng Wang2,3,4 , Ru Huang2,3,4 , Meng Li1,2,4∗
1 Institute for Artificial Intelligence & 2 School of Integrated Circuits, Peking University, Beijing, China
3 Institute of Electronic Design Automation, Peking University, Wuxi, China
4 Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Integrated Circuits, Beijing, China

arXiv:2408.10284v1 [cs.LG] 19 Aug 2024

Abstract
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models are designed to enhance
the efficiency of large language models (LLMs) without proportionally increasing the computational demands. However, their deployment on edge devices still faces significant
challenges due to high on-demand loading overheads from
managing sparsely activated experts. This paper introduces
AdapMoE, an algorithm-system co-design framework for
efficient MoE inference. AdapMoE features adaptive expert
gating and management to reduce the on-demand loading
overheads. We observe the heterogeneity of experts loading across layers and tokens, based on which we propose a
sensitivity-based strategy to adjust the number of activated
experts dynamically. Meanwhile, we also integrate advanced
prefetching and cache management techniques to further
reduce the loading latency. Through comprehensive evaluations on various platforms, we demonstrate AdapMoE consistently outperforms existing techniques, reducing the average
number of activated experts by 25% and achieving a 1.35×
speedup without accuracy degradation. Code is available at:
https://github.com/PKU-SEC-Lab/AdapMoE.

1

Introduction

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) [15] models are designed to relieve
the high compute requirements of large language models
(LLMs) by introducing sparsely activated pathways. The
feedforward block in MoE uses a gating function to select
from different parameter groups, allowing the model to scale
in size without a corresponding increase in computation. For
instance, in the Mixtral-8x7b model, each token can access
∗ Corresponding Author, meng.li@pku.edu.cn

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICCAD ’24, October 27–31, 2024, New York, NY, USA
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1077-3/24/10
https://doi.org/10.1145/3676536.3676741

A100

4090

GPU SRAM

SRAM size 108x164 KB 128x128 KB
HBM
Bandwidth

2 TB/s

1 TB/s

GPU HBM

HBM Size

80 GB

24 GB

Host2Device
Bandwidth

16 GB/s

16 GB/s

DRAM Size

~1TB

~128GB

CPU DRAM

(a)
Compute
Memory

(b)

Non-MoE

Expert 1
Load Expert 1

Expert 2
Load Expert 2

(c)

Figure 1. GPU resource utilization and task execution timeline: (a) hardware specs comparison between NVIDIA A100
and 4090 GPUs; (b) GPU time distribution; (c) task timeline
with offloading.

47 billion parameters, yet only 13 billion active parameters
are utilized during each inference iteration [9].
Unfortunately, the substantial memory requirements of
MoE makes it difficult to be deployed, especially on edge devices with limited memory. A common solution is offloading,
where expert weights are stored on CPU memory, SSDs, or
Flash storage and loaded into the GPU only when needed
[1, 14, 15]. However, the approach of dynamically loading
activated experts on-demand leads to the serialization of
the expert selection phase with the expert execution phase,
thereby introducing significant performance overhead.
The main bottleneck in MoE inference is attributed to the
on-demand loading of experts. As illustrated in Figure 1,
this loading phase constitutes the majority of the latency
during MoE inference, primarily due to the substantial communication scale and limited bandwidth available.
Faced with these challenges, existing works have explored
several efficient MoE inference techniques. Adap-gating [11]
allows tokens to be processed by a variable number of experts
based on expert probability distribution. Though efficient,
the heuristic gating criteria will lead to low accuracy compared with original fixed top-k routing. Mixtral-offloading
[5] observes token-wise expert selection similarities and
adopts least recently used(LRU) algorithm to manage the
expert cache. Its fixed cache allocation strategy across each
layer limits its adaptability and effectiveness. MoE-Infinity
[17] observes correlations in expert selection across layers,

using previous layers’ activations to predict subsequent expert activations. However, its straightforward predictive approach results in lower prefetching accuracy. Pre-gated MoE
[8] modifies the structure of MoE, in which the experts are
selected based on the previous layers’ activation. Despite
its ability to accurately predict expert usage and execute
prefetching, the structural modifications will complicate direct deployment.
Despite these advances in MoE inference techniques, all
existing solutions fail to comprehensively address all the
critical factors affecting system performance simultaneously.
Specifically, there has been a lack of a formal optimization
approach that integrates expert gating, prefetching, and
caching within a unified framework. Adap-gating and Pregated MoE will even cause accuracy degradation if directly
deployed without finetuning.
In this work, we propose AdapMoE, an algorithm-system
co-design framework that enables adaptive expert gating
and management for MoE inference without accuracy degradation. We identify three critical factors that significantly
influence the on-demand loading overhead: the number of
activated experts, the accuracy of prefetching, and the cache
hit probability. Targeting these factors, our contributions in
designing AdapMoE include:
• Adaptive and sensitivity-based expert gating. We
propose an adaptive and sensitivity-based gating mechanism for the MoE inference process, which allows tokens to be processed by a dynamically flexible number
of experts without accuracy degradation.
• Adaptive expert prefetching. We observe the high
similarities between activations in different layers and
leverages the gating decisions of subsequent layers as
predictive signals to prefetch experts for these layers
in advance.
• Adaptive cache allocation. We proposed a dynamic
programming based formulation for the cache size allocation to minimize the on-demand loading overhead.
• System implementation. We implement expert management of AdapMoE with fine-grained CUDA stream
controller to maximize the overlap between communications and computations.
We evaluate the performance of AdapMoE system using
state-of-the-art Mixtral models on various platforms and
datasets. Our adaptive gating algorithm can maintain high
accuracy levels while significantly reducing the experts activation by 25% compared with traditional top-2 gating. AdapMoE consistently outperforms all the existing expert management methods by 1.35x.

2

Background

2.1

Mixture-of-Experts

Mixture-of-Experts(MoE) [12] models present a solution
to manage the extensive computational demands of LLMs

through sparsely activated pathways, including Mixtral [9],
NLLB-MoE [4], and SwitchTransformer [6]. A gating function 𝐺 (𝑥) determines which of several distinct parameter
groups, or "experts," are activated for a given input:
𝐺 (𝑥) = Softmax(TopK(𝑥 · 𝑊𝑔 ))

(1)

The MoE module outputs are determined by a weighted
sum of individual expert outputs. Given N experts 𝐸 0, 𝐸 1 ,...,
𝐸 𝑁 −1 , the output can be expressed as:
𝑁
−1
∑︁

𝐺 (𝑥)𝑖 · 𝐸𝑖 (𝑥),

(2)

𝑖=0

The total number of experts N and the number of activated
experts K vary among different MoE implementations. For
instance, the Mixtral model employs 8 experts, with only 2
being active at a time.
2.2

Efficient MoE Inference

The substantial memory requirements of MoE makes it difficult to be deployed on edge devices with limited memory.
To handle this problem, a typical solution is to offload model
parameters into CPU memory or SSDs, such as DeepSpeed
[1] and FlexGen [16]. However, they are designed for dense
models and will load/prefetch all parameters, leading to unnecessary communication overhead.
In response to the specific challenges posed by sparse
expert activation in MoE models, various specialized MoE
inference techniques have been developed, including Adapgating[11], EdgeMoe [19], MoE-Infinity [17], Mixtral-offloading
[5] and Pre-gated MoE [8]. These frameworks propose several gating, prefetching or caching algorithm. Despite these
advancements, many of these solutions still struggle with
critical issues. For instance, frameworks like Adap-gating and
Pre-gated MoE can experience significant accuracy degradation when directly deployed. These techniques fail to comprehensively address all key factors affecting accuracy and
performance, which leads to suboptimal performance.

3

Motivations and observations

The primary bottleneck in MoE edge inference is attributed
to the on-demand loading of experts, a process that cannot
be fully overlapped with computation and thus occupies a
significant portion of the total inference time. To address this
issue, we begin by analyzing the main factors that influence
the frequency of on-demand loading:
Number of activated experts: Reducing the number
of activated experts can directly decrease the frequency of
on-demand loading.
Accuracy of prefetching: Accurate prefetching allows
the overlap of expert loading with computation in subsequent layers, effectively eliminating performance impacts.
Cache hit probability: If the required experts are already
cached in memory, computations can be performed directly
without on-demand loading.



$FWLYDWDLRQ&RVLQH6LPLODULWLHV%HWZHHQ/D\HUV

6LPLODULW\







                              

/D\HU

4

AdapMoE Design

4.1

Overview

This paper introduces AdapMoE, an algorithm-system codesign for scalable and efficient MoE inference on edge devices. AdapMoE is designed to address the high latency overhead associated with the on-demand loading of experts during MoE inference. AdapMoE proposes (i) a sensitivity-based

Prefetch Hit

Expert 0
Expert 1
+

Expert 6
Expert 7

Adaptive Prefetch (Sec 4.3)

Adaptive Gate (Sec 4.2)

Adaptive Gate (Sec 4.2)

Prefetch Miss

Expert 0
Expert 1
+

…

Targeting these factors, we make the following observations that motivate us to propose AdapMoE:
Observation 1: Dynamic Expert Demand. Intuitively,
the requirement for experts varies across different tokens
and layers. As illustrated in Figure 2, some tokens exhibit a
significantly biased weight distribution, necessitating fewer
experts. Additionally, the relevance of different layers to
the final output varies; layers of less importance can tolerate a reduction in the number of activated experts without
substantial impact on the overall model performance. By
activating fewer experts, the demand for on-demand loading
overheads can be directly reduced.
Observation 2: Similar intermediate activation. As
shown in figure 3, the activations between successive layers
exhibit a very high degree of similarity. This characteristic
is due to the nature of the residual connections, which will
accumulate the output of each layer, thus maintaining a
consistency in the feature space as the depth increases. The
similarity can be utilized to predict the experts needed in
upcoming layers more accurately.
Observation 3: Unbalanced expert cache demands.
Different layers varies in the prefetching accuracy and required number of activated experts, leading to adaptive demands for cache size under different platforms. Effective
cache management must adapt to these varied needs to optimize overall system performance, ensuring resources are
used where they are most needed.

Expert 0

…

Figure 2. Expert weight score distribution: (a) scores of top-1
expert per layer; (b) (c) weight score distribution examples.

Expert 6

…

Prefetch Gate

Figure 3. Cosine similarities between the input of each
layer’s moe block and the input of its next layer’s moe block.

Expert 6
Expert 7
Cache Hit

Cache Hit
Expert 0

Expert 1

Adaptive Cache (Sec 4.4)

Expert 7

Figure 4. Overview of AdapMoE.

adaptive gating mechanism that allows tokens to be processed by a dynamically flexible number of experts(Sec. 4.2),
(ii) an expert prediction and adaptive prefetching algorithm
that achieves high prefetching accuracy without modification and finetuning of models(Sec. 4.3), and (iii) a DP-based
cache allocation algorithm to meet the unbalanced expert
cache demands(Sec. 4.4).
Figure 4 presents an architectural overview of AdapMoE.
The system initially collects sensitivity and prediction data
from a sampled dataset in the offline phase. Subsequently, it
applies adaptive gating, prefetching, and caching during online operation. Adaptive gating will influence the prefetching
algorithm, and both gating and prefetching will then guide
caching decisions, optimizing resource allocation to match
real-time data variability effectively.
4.2

Adaptive and Sensitivity-based Expert Gating

As we plot in figure 2, the score distribution of experts differs
among different tokens and different layers. The distribution clearly demonstrate an unbalanced pattern, where the
required number of experts are different during inference.
Therefore, the main task for adaptive expert gating is to find
an optimal way to allocate distinct number of experts for
each token in each layer.
Thus, it is crucial to quantify the sensitivity of the gating
mechanism to fluctuations in the number of experts per
layer. We define a perturbation metric that measures the

deviation in performance when varying the number of active
experts. This metric allows us to establish a threshold𝑇 . If the
perturbation is less than the threshold 𝑇 , the gating system
can safely activate a smaller subset of experts.
Let 𝑥 be the input of MoE block, 𝑓1 be the expert with
highest score, 𝑓2 be the expert with the second highest score,
𝛼 be the score of Top-1 expert after normalization in layer
𝑖. The original output 𝑂 0 of the sparse moe block in layer 𝑖
can be represented as:
𝑂 0 = 𝛼 𝑓1 (𝑥) + (1 − 𝛼) 𝑓2 (𝑥)

(3)

If we conduct adaptive gating and only activate the first
expert, the output O can be represented as:
𝑂 = 𝑓1 (𝑥)

Gate 4
Gate 3

Gate 5

Adaptive
Prefetch

Gate 4

Gate 2

Gate 1

Adaptive
Prefetch

Gate 3

Experts
in Layer 1

...

Gate 2

Experts
in Layer 2

Figure 5. Adaptive prefetching workflow. Gate i represents the gating function in layer i. Adaptive gating enables
prefetch multiple next layers’ experts.

(4)

To determine the influence of adaptive gating in each layer,
we can perform Taylor series expansion to analyze how the
model output changes in response to perturbations by the
adaptive gating.
1
𝐿(𝑂) ≃ 𝐿(𝑂 0 ) + 𝑔𝑇 (𝑂 − 𝑂 0 ) + (𝑂 − 𝑂 0 )𝑇 𝐻 (𝑂 − 𝑂 0 )
(5)
2
1
≃ 𝐿(𝑂 0 ) + (1 − 𝛼) 2 (𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥))𝑇 𝐻 (𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥))
2
2

𝜕
where g is the gradient of 𝑂 0 and 𝐻 = 𝐸 [ 𝜕𝑂
2 𝐿(𝑂 0 )] is the
0
second derivative (i.e, Hessian) of the loss at 𝑂 0 . Assuming the model has converged to a local minimum, we can
approximate the gradient 𝑔 as being zero [10].
Hessian matrices can be computed using a second backpropagation [18]; however, this approach is highly memoryintensive, making it impractical, especially for MoE models.
To address these challenges, we adopt Fisher information
matrix to approximate the hessian matrix following [10].
1 ∑︁
𝐻 ≃𝐹 =
𝑔𝑑 𝑔𝑇𝑑 ,
(6)
|𝐷 |
𝑑 ∈𝐷

where 𝐷 is the sample dataset.
The term 𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥) represents the difference between
two experts. However, it is input-specific and hard to be measured. What’s more, difference of experts in a well-trained
MoE model should be similar. Thus we approximate this
term as:
(𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥))𝑇 𝐻 (𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥))
≃(𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥))𝑇 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝐹 ) (𝑓1 (𝑥) − 𝑓2 (𝑥)) ∝

∑︁

𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝐹 )
(7)

Finally, given a threshold 𝑇 , only one expert will be activated
if the Hessian and weight score in this layer satisfy:
∑︁
(1 − 𝛼) 2 ×
𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝐹 ) ≤ 𝑇 ,
(8)
where 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑔(𝐹 ) denotes the diagonal elements of 𝐹 . The value
of 𝑇 is uniformly applied across all layers in the MoE model.
The specific value of 𝑇 is determined by identifying the
optimal balance on a validation set, where it minimizes the

average number of expert activations without compromising
the model’s accuracy. Compared with score-based adaptive
gating [11] that only takes 𝛼 into account, our sensitivitybased gating considers the layer importance and allows for
higher single expert activation ratios without compromising
accuracy.
4.3

Adaptive Expert Prefetching

Expert prefetching can significantly mitigate on-demand
loading overheads by overlapping the communication latency with computation of MoE and attention blocks. Meanwhile, the prefetching efficiency relies highly on the prediction accuracy of next layer’s expert selection.
As depicted in figure 5, AdapMoE utilizes the gate functions from the subsequent layer directly for predictive prefetching. The key to this adaptive prefetching is the high similarity
in activations across layers, as established in Observation 2
from Section 3.
Furthermore, the activations are indicative of the expert selections not only for the immediate next layer but potentially
for the next two/three layers. AdapMoE predicts potentially
selected experts for the subsequent layers, incorporating
adaptive gating into predictions. If the experts needed by the
next layer are already cached in the GPU memory, AdapMoE
preemptively fetches experts required for subsequent layers,
extending beyond the immediate next.
However, one important question still reamains: How do
we prefetch the experts for the first layer? Given that the
first layer lacks preceding layers from which to infer gating
information, previous works, such as Pre-gated MoE, are
constrained to on-demand loading these experts. Here we
introduce an auxiliary predictive layer specifically designed
to estimate the gating for the first layer’s expert selection
with the last layer activation of the previous token. This
predictive layer is trained to minimize the divergence between its predictions and the actual gating decisions of the
first layer, thereby allowing for a more efficient prefetching
strategy that can potentially reduce latency significantly.

Table 1. Notations used for the DP formulation.

4.4.1 Variable Definition. The notations of the DP formulation are defined in table 1. Among these variables, 𝑇
is predetermined by the hardware configuration, 𝛼 and 𝛽
are determined by offline profiling, 𝑡 is the optimization target. The function 𝑓𝑖𝑡 , representing the on-demand loading
frequency for each layer under different cache sizes, can be
quantified through these variables. The details of how 𝑓𝑖𝑡 is
calculated will be introduced in the following section.

Variable
Meaning
𝑇
Total expert cache size
𝐿
Number of model layers
𝑁
Number of experts per layer
𝑡𝑖
Expert cache size of layer i
𝛼𝑖
Single expert gating probability
𝛽𝑖
Prefetching accuracy of layer i
On-demand loading quantities
𝑓𝑖,𝑡
of layer i under cache size t

Let 𝐷 𝐾𝐿 denote the Kullback-Leibler(KL) divergence, 𝐴𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡
represents the activations from the last layer of the previous
token, 𝐴 𝑓 𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 denote the activations from the first layer of
the current token, and 𝐺 𝑓 𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 be the gate function for the first
layer, 𝐺 𝑝𝑟𝑒 be the predictive gate. The loss 𝐿 is computed as
follows:

4.4.2 On-demand Loading Quantification. In this section, we use the Mixtral MoE model to analyze the representation of on-demand loading costs, which will select 2
experts from 8 experts per layer.
First, we calculate the probability of hitting the cache 𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑡
of a specified expert. Due to the expert similarity between
successive tokens is not significant, we can simplify the
calculation of 𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑡 by directly relating it to the cache size
allocated for each expert.
𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑡 =

𝑡𝑖
𝑁

(10)

𝐿 = 𝐷 𝐾𝐿 (𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝐺 𝑓 𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 (𝐴 𝑓 𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 )) [:,0:−1,:]
||𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝐺 𝑝𝑟𝑒 (𝐴𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑡 )) [:,1:,:] )

(9)

The training of this predictive gate is optional, providing flexibility based on resource availability computational
constraints. Also, the training overhead for this gate is very
samll, for the parameter count is only hidden_dim × expert_num. Experiments demonstrate that the predictive gate
dedicated to the first layer’s expert selection, along with the
reuse of gate functions in subsequent layers, both achieve
high accuracy in prefetch, which will further elaborate in
section 6.
4.4

Adaptive Expert Caching

Expert caching is critical for MoE edge inference. By storing frequently selected experts in the GPU memory, expert
caching can significantly reduce the on-demand loading overheads.
However, due to adaptive expert gating and adaptive prefetching, the cache demands for experts across different layers
can become unbalanced. On the one hand, layers that tend to
select more experts require a larger cache footprint to store
these experts in the GPU memory; On the other hand, layers
with lower prefetching accuracy also require increased cache
storage to accommodate potential misses, ensuring that subsequent computation will not be stalled by on-demand loading delays.
In this section, we first quantify the on-demand loading
overheads for each layer by analyzing tracing data, which
encompasses metrics related to adaptive gating and prefetching. Then we formulate the cache size allocation problem
as a knapsack problem. Finally, we employ a dynamic programming algorithm to find the optimal cache allocation
strategies on given platforms.

Similarly, the cache hit probability of two specified experts
𝑖 −1
can be represented as 𝑁𝑡×𝑖 ×𝑡
(𝑁 −1) , the cache miss probability of
−𝑡𝑖 −1)
two specified experts can be represented as 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ( (𝑁 −𝑡𝑁𝑖 ×) ×(𝑁(𝑁−1)
, 0).
We then explore the on-demand loading costs based on
the number of activated experts:
When only one expert is required. The on-demand
loading overhead occurs if there is a cache miss combined
with incorrect prefetching. This cost is represented as:

𝑓𝑖,𝑡1 = (1 −

𝑡𝑖
) × (1 − 𝛽𝑖 )
𝑁

(11)

When two experts are required. This scenario introduces more complexity and can be broken down into several
cases:
• Both experts miss the cache and prefetching is incorrect: In this case, both experts need to be loaded
on-demand, which significantly increases the loading
overhead. The loading cost can be represented as:
𝑓𝑖,𝑡2 = 2 × 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (

(𝑁 − 𝑡𝑖 ) × (𝑁 − 𝑡𝑖 − 1)
, 0) × (1 − 𝛽𝑖 ) (12)
𝑁 × (𝑁 − 1)

• Both experts miss the cache but prefetching is correct for one expert: Here, only one expert needs to be
loaded on-demand. The on-demand loading costs can
be represented as:
𝑓𝑖,𝑡3 = 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (

(𝑁 − 𝑡𝑖 ) × (𝑁 − 𝑡𝑖 − 1)
, 0) × 𝛽𝑖
𝑁 × (𝑁 − 1)

(13)

• One expert hits the cache but prefetching is incorrect: The on-demand loading cost for this case can
be calculated by considering the probability that one
specific expert is cached and the other is not, yet the

prefetching inaccurately predicts the need for the second expert. The formula for this cost is the following.
2 × (𝑁 − 𝑡𝑖 ) × 𝑡𝑖
𝑓𝑖,𝑡4 =
× (1 − 𝛽𝑖 )
(14)
𝑁 × (𝑁 − 1)
Finally, the overall on-demand loading costs of layer i can
be calculated as:
𝑓𝑖,𝑡 = 𝛼𝑖 × 𝑓𝑖,𝑡1 + (1 − 𝛼𝑖 ) × (𝑓𝑖,𝑡2 + 𝑓𝑖,𝑡3 + 𝑓𝑖,𝑡4 )

Expert B
B

Non-MoE

Expert C

C

(a)
Compute
Communication

Expert A B1
B1

B2

B2
B3

B3
C1

On-demand Loading

Non-MoE
C2

C1 C2 C3
C3

Prefetching

(b)

Figure 6. (a) Timeline of expert-wise scheduling; (b) timeline of tile-wise scheduling. Tile-wise scheduling enables
to further overlap the computation and communication for
better efficiency.

(17)

on-demand. By managing these tasks in parallel, the system ensures that computing resources are utilized effectively
without waiting for data transfers to complete.
To address the delay associated with the on-demand loading of experts, which cannot be processed until fully loaded
into the GPU, our system employs a strategic tiling approach.
As illustrated in Figure 6, this strategy involves dividing each
expert into smaller tiles. Each tile is loaded and processed
as soon as it becomes available, enabling computations to
significantly overlap with data loading. This method effectively minimizes the delays typically caused by data transfers,
thereby accelerating the overall computation process and
enhancing system throughput.

(18)

6

Experimental Results

6.1

Experiment setup

𝑖

Constraints. Constraint 17 means the sum of the cache
sizes allocated to each layer must not exceed the total available cache size; Constraint 18 ensures Each 𝑡𝑖 must be nonnegative and cannot be greater than the total number of
experts N at any layer.
𝑡𝑖 ≤ 𝑇

Expert A

Communication

(15)

4.4.3 DP Formulation. The goal of adaptive caching in
MoE inference is to optimize the values of 𝑡𝑖 for each layer.
This optimization aims to minimize the total on-demand
loading overheads while staying within the limits of the
total cache size 𝑇 .
The problem can be mathematically formulated as an optimization scenario where:
Objective Function. Minimize the total expected ondemand loading cost, expressed as a sum of the individual
costs 𝑓𝑖,𝑡𝑖 for each layer 𝑖.
∑︁
min
𝑓𝑖,𝑡𝑖
(16)

𝐿
∑︁

Compute

𝑖=1

0 ≤ 𝑡𝑖 ≤ 𝑁

∀𝑖

This can be viewed as a knapsack problem and solved
by dynamic programming. Define 𝐹 [𝑖] [ 𝑗] as the minimum
on-demand loading cost achievable by considering the first 𝑖
layers and using up to j units of expert cache. The aim is to
compute 𝐹 [𝐿] [𝑇 ].
We start with 𝐹 [0] [ 𝑗] = 0 and then for each layer 𝑖 ∈ [1, 𝐿]
and for each possible cache capacity 𝑗 ∈ [0,𝑇 ], derive the
optimal substructure of F as
𝐹 [𝑖] [ 𝑗] = 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑘 ≤ 𝑗 (𝐹 [𝑖 − 1] [ 𝑗 − 𝑘] + 𝑓𝑖,𝑘 )

(19)

To finalize the cache allocations, start from the last layer
and total cache size, and trace back through each layer to determine the specific cache allocation that led to the minimum
cost.

5

Models. We utilize Mixtral [9] as the baseline MoE for our
evaluations, a widely-used open-source MoE model. We test
the 8x7b and 8x22b models under different quantization configurations to demonstrate the scalability of AdapMoE under
different model sizes.
Datasets. We use two famous LLM benchmark datasets to
evaluate the accuracy of adaptive gating, including MMLU
[7] and ARC-Challenge [3]. Additionally, for testing generation speed, we sample prompts from the MT Bench [20] to
create realistic usage scenarios.
Platforms. We test the Mixtral-8x7b model on RTX 4090
and A6000, and Mixtral-8x22b model on A6000. We test different sizes of total cached experts to demonstrate the scalability
of AdapMoE.

System Implementation

The implementation of the AdapMoE system is architected
to take full advantage of GPU resources, specifically utilizing
CUDA streams for efficient overlap of memory operations
and computation.
The workflow, as outlined in Algorithm 1, begins by processing the experts that are already loaded into the GPU.
It then efficiently handles experts that need to be loaded

6.2

Accuracy Comparison

In this section, we quantify the impact of our adaptive gating
mechanism on MoE’s model accuracy. We sample different
threshold to get different single expert activation ratios. All
the models are quantized into 4bit in the experiments. We
test the model accuracy on two famous LLM benchmark
datasets, MMLU and ARC-Challenge.

Algorithm 1 AdapMoE System Workflow

Score-Based

Sensitivity-Based
76.6
76.4
76.2

69.0

76.0
68.5

Score

Score

1: Data Structures:
2: 𝐸 ← Set of required experts for the current layer
3: 𝑟 ← Experts to prefetch for subsequent layers
4: ℎ ← Activations
5: end Data Structures

69.5

68.0

75.8
75.6
75.4

67.5
75.2

6:
7: function ComputeStream
8:
𝐸, 𝑟 ← AdaptiveGates(ℎ)
9:
𝑡𝑜_𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 ← 𝐸.𝑖𝑛_𝐶𝑃𝑈 ∪ 𝑟
10:
Enqeue(transfer_queue, to_transfer)
11:
Notify(comm_stream)

67.0

75.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Single Expert Selection Ratio

Single Expert Selection Ratio

(a) Mixtral 8x7b on MMLU

(b) Mixtral 8x22b on MMLU

61.0

0.6

63.0

60.5

62.5

60.0
62.0

Score

Score

59.5
59.0
58.5

61.5

61.0

58.0

60.5

57.5
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

60.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Single Expert Selection Ratio

Single Expert Selection Ratio

(c) Mixtral 8x7b on ARC-C

(d) Mixtral 8x22b on ARC-C

Figure 7. Accuracy comparison between the adaptive
sensitivity-based gating and the score-based gating for different MoE models and NLP benchmarks.

Baseline Offloading

Mixtral-Offloading

Pre-gated MoE (Large
Accuracy Degradation)

AdapMoE w/o adap gating

AdapMoE w/ adap gating
0.8

0.5

0.7
0.6

0.4

Latency

0.5

Latency

Enqeue(compute_queue, 𝐸.𝑖𝑛_𝐺𝑃𝑈 )
Enqeue(compute_queue, 𝐸.𝑖𝑛_𝐶𝑃𝑈 )
ProcessQueue(compute_queue, activations)
15: function CommStream
16:
while true do
17:
if NotEmpty(transfer_queue) then
18:
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 ← Deqeue(𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠 𝑓 𝑒𝑟 _𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒)
19:
for all 𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒 in 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 do
20:
Transfer(tile)
21:
NotifyTile(tile)
22: function ProcessQueue(queue,h)
23:
for all 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 in 𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 do
24:
if 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 in GPU then
25:
Compute(expert,h)
26:
else
27:
Split(expert)
28:
for all 𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒 in 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 do
29:
WaitForTile(tile)
30:
Compute(tile,h)
31:
𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡 .𝑖𝑛_𝐺𝑃𝑈 = True
12:
13:
14:

0.3

0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0

64

96

128

0.0

160

64

96

128

#Cached Experts

#Cached Experts

(a) Mixtral 8x7b 4+2bit on 4090

(b) Mixtral 8x7b 4bit on 4090

0.7

6.3

Performance Comparison

We evaluate our framework against baseline offloading algorithms, Mixtral-offloading1 and Pre-gated MoE. Baseline
offloading algorithm will load/offload the whole layer as
adopted in Deepspeed [13], Flexgen [16], etc. Pre-gated MoE
1 Mixtral-offloading will not store all of the experts in CPU. We modify this

configuration for fair comparison. The results of Mixtral-offloading in our
experiments is 2x faster than its open-source version.

1.6
0.6

1.4

0.5

1.2

0.4

1.0

Latency

Latency

Figure 7 illustrates the model accuracy differences when
employing score-based [11] versus sensitivity-based adaptive
gating mechanisms under varying single expert activation
ratios. Notably, sensitivity-based adaptive gating demonstrates a higher tolerance for increased single expert activation ratios without a corresponding decrease in accuracy.
This robustness suggests that sensitivity-based gating more
effectively leverages the most relevant experts, maintaining high performance even as the selection becomes more
concentrated.

0.3

0.8
0.6

0.2
0.4
0.1
0.0

0.2

64

96

128

160

0.0

64

96

128

#Cached Experts

#Cached Experts

(c) Mixtral 8x7b 4bit on A6000

(d) Mixtral 8x22b 4bit on A6000

Figure 8. Inference speed comparison between AdapMoE
and the baselines for different quantization configurations,
model sizes, cached experts sizes, and platforms.

is the SOTA MoE inference mechanism. We implement its
algorithm by modifying the structure of Mixtral to prefetch
and select experts based on the activations from the previous layer. All the methods take LRU as its cache elimination
algorithm.

speedup
1.25×
1.22×
1.29×
1.22×
1.27×
1.36×

0.9

Score-based
Sensitivity-based

0.8

0.8

0.7
Accuracy

latency(s)
0.392
0.313
0.322
0.305
0.321
0.308
0.288

1.0

0.6
0.4

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2
0.1

0.0
0

5

10

15
20
Layer
(a)

25

0.0

30

0

5

10

15
20
Layer
(b)

25

30

9
8
7
Cache size

Technique
baseline
basline+gating
baseline+prefetch
baseline+gating+cache
baseline+prefetch+cache
baseline+gating+prefetch
all

Single expert selection ratio

Table 2. MoE inference speedup breakdown of proposed
techniques.

6
5
4
3
2
1

In our evaluations of AdapMoE, we conducted tests with
and without the adaptive gating mechanism. The version
without adaptive gating was configured to ensure identical
output consistency with the baseline offloading and Mixtraloffloading. For the version equipped with adaptive gating, we
choose a conservative single expert activation ratio of 24%.
This setting was chosen to safeguard the model’s accuracy
for fair comparison.
The mixtral models are quantized into 4+2 bit and 4bit
using hqq framework [2]. 4+2 bit will quantize the attention blocks into 4bit and MoE blocks into 2bit for efficient
inference adopted by mixtral-offloading.
As shown in figure 8, AdapMoE significantly reduces latency by an average 1.35× vs. Mixtral-Offloading. AdapMoE
also exhibits comparable latency to Pre-gated MoE. The version of AdapMoE without adaptive gating matches the performance of Pre-gated MoE, while the version with gating
consistently surpasses it, achieving better results without the
need for additional finetuning or training. Compared with
Pre-gated MoE, this performance improvement is largely due
to the implementation of adaptive prefetching and caching
strategies. These strategies will prefetch experts for the next
two or three layers and allocate additional cache size to more
crucial layers, optimizing resource use and minimizing latency.
6.4

Ablation Study

We further explore how the components of our method contribute to the result. We take Mixtral-8x7b 4bit on 4090 with
128 cached experts as an example and show the impact of
the proposed speedup techniques on the per-token latency.
The baseline technique is our modified version of Mixtraloffloading on our framework, which is 2× faster than its
open-source version.
As shown in table 2, each component of AdapMoE contributes to reducing the latency. The combined application
of all techniques can lead to 1.36× speedup.

0

5

10

15

Layer

20

25

30

(c)

Figure 9. (a) Single expert selection ratios; (b) expert prefetch
prediction accuracy of different layers; (c) expert cache allocation for different layers.
6.5

Discussions

Sensitivity. Figure 9(a) presents the single expert activation
ratios of score-based gating and sensitivity-based gating. Earlier layers are more sensitive to perturbation. In comparison
to score-based adaptive gating, AdapMoE tends to activate
more experts in early layers, which contributes to enhanced
overall accuracy.
Prefetch accuracy. Figure 9(b) illustrates the prefetching
accuracy across different layers. The prediction for the first
layer is derived from the trained predictive gates, while for
subsequent layers, it is based on the reuse of existing gates.
The graph demonstrates that most layers maintain a high
level of expert activation prediction accuracy, achieving rates
around 90%.
Cache allocation. Figure 9(c) shows the cache size allocation for Mixtral 8x7b with total cache size 128. More experts
of the early layers will be stored in GPU memory, for the
early layers are more sensitivity and harder to be prefetched.

7

Conclusion

This paper introduces AdapMoE, an algorithm-system codesign for scalable and efficient MoE inference on edge devices. By implementing adaptive expert gating, prefetching,
and caching within a unified framework, AdapMoE addresses
the challenges of high latency and substantial on-demand
loading overheads commonly associated with MoE models.
Our evaluations across various hardware platforms demonstrate that AdapMoE not only reduces the activation of experts by 25% but also achieves a 1.35x speedup in inference
times, all without compromising the accuracy of the model.

References
[1] Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Ammar Ahmad Awan,
Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, Olatunji Ruwase, Shaden Smith, Minjia
Zhang, Jeff Rasley, et al. 2022. Deepspeed-inference: enabling efficient
inference of transformer models at unprecedented scale. In SC22: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis. IEEE, 1–15.
[2] Hicham Badri and Appu Shaji. 2023. Half-Quadratic Quantization of
Large Machine Learning Models. https://mobiusml.github.io/hqq_
blog/
[3] Peter Clark, Isaac Cowhey, Oren Etzioni, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Carissa Schoenick, and Oyvind Tafjord. 2018. Think you have
solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.05457 (2018).
[4] Marta R Costa-jussà, James Cross, Onur Çelebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth
Heafield, Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht,
Jean Maillard, et al. 2022. No language left behind: Scaling humancentered machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672 (2022).
[5] Artyom Eliseev and Denis Mazur. 2023.
Fast inference of
mixture-of-experts language models with offloading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.17238 (2023).
[6] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022. Switch transformers: Scaling to trillion parameter models with simple and efficient
sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 120 (2022), 1–39.
[7] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas
Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2020. Measuring massive
multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300
(2020).
[8] Ranggi Hwang, Jianyu Wei, Shijie Cao, Changho Hwang, Xiaohu Tang,
Ting Cao, Mao Yang, and Minsoo Rhu. 2023. Pre-gated MoE: An
Algorithm-System Co-Design for Fast and Scalable Mixture-of-Expert
Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12066 (2023).
[9] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch,
Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las
Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. 2024. Mixtral of
experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088 (2024).
[10] Sehoon Kim, Coleman Hooper, Amir Gholami, Zhen Dong, Xiuyu Li,
Sheng Shen, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2023. Squeezellm:
Dense-and-sparse quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07629 (2023).
[11] Jiamin Li, Qiang Su, Yitao Yang, Yimin Jiang, Cong Wang, and Hong Xu.
2023. Adaptive gating in mixture-of-experts based language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07188 (2023).
[12] Saeed Masoudnia and Reza Ebrahimpour. 2014. Mixture of experts: a
literature survey. Artificial Intelligence Review 42 (2014), 275–293.
[13] Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, Jeff Rasley, Shaden Smith,
and Yuxiong He. 2021. Zero-infinity: Breaking the gpu memory wall
for extreme scale deep learning. In Proceedings of the international
conference for high performance computing, networking, storage and
analysis. 1–14.
[14] Jie Ren, Samyam Rajbhandari, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Olatunji
Ruwase, Shuangyan Yang, Minjia Zhang, Dong Li, and Yuxiong He.
2021. {Zero-offload}: Democratizing {billion-scale} model training. In
2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21). 551–564.
[15] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis,
Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously large
neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.06538 (2017).
[16] Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max Ryabinin,
Beidi Chen, Percy Liang, Christopher Ré, Ion Stoica, and Ce Zhang.
2023. Flexgen: High-throughput generative inference of large language
models with a single gpu. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 31094–31116.
[17] Leyang Xue, Yao Fu, Zhan Lu, Luo Mai, and Mahesh Marina. 2024.
MoE-Infinity: Activation-Aware Expert Offloading for Efficient MoE

Serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14361 (2024).
[18] Zhewei Yao, Amir Gholami, Kurt Keutzer, and Michael W Mahoney.
2020. Pyhessian: Neural networks through the lens of the hessian. In
2020 IEEE international conference on big data (Big data). IEEE, 581–590.
[19] Rongjie Yi, Liwei Guo, Shiyun Wei, Ao Zhou, Shangguang Wang, and
Mengwei Xu. 2023. Edgemoe: Fast on-device inference of moe-based
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14352 (2023).
[20] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing,
et al. 2024. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024).

